Extended Readme (#192)
CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software: README_NEW.md

[![pypi](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/CMIP7-data-request-api.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/CMIP7-data-request-api)
[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software/main?filepath=notebooks)
[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software/)
[![NBviewer](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jupyter/design/master/logos/Badges/nbviewer_badge.svg)](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software/tree/main/notebooks/)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software.svg)](https://github.com/CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![status](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#active)

> # CMIP7 Data Request Software (CMIP7 DReq Software) – Quick User Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# CMIP7 Data Request Software

Quick user guide for python software to interact with the [CMIP7 data request](https://wcrp-cmip.org/cmip7/cmip7-data-request/).
```

## Table of Contents
1. [Purpose](#purpose) 
2. [Release Versions](#release-versions)
3. [Try It Without Installation](#try-it-without-installation)
4. [Installation](#installation)  
5. [Configuration](#configuration)  
6. [Quick Start](#quick-start)
7. [Documentation](#documentation) 
8. [Contributors](#contributors) 
9. [Contact](#contact)  

## Purpose

> **The CMIP7 DReq Software**  is a Python software designed to interact with the [CMIP7 Data Request](https://wcrp-cmip.org/cmip7/cmip7-data-request/) (this latter is also qualified as "Data Request ***Content***" in order to distinguish from the current "Data Request ***Software***", see the schema bellow to see the pathway between the two). It provides an API to *query* and *utilize* the information in the Data Request, including [command-line (CLI) utilities](#command-line-utilities), [example scripts](#python-scripts) and [notebooks](#notebooks) showing how to use the API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The CMIP7 DReq Software**  is Python software designed to interact with the [CMIP7 Data Request](https://wcrp-cmip.org/cmip7/cmip7-data-request/), which is referred to herein as the **Data Request Content** in order to distinguish from the **Software**; the schematic below shows the relationship between the two. It provides an API to *query* and *utilize* the information in the Data Request, including [command-line (CLI) utilities](#command-line-utilities), [example scripts](#python-scripts) and [notebooks](#notebooks) showing how to use the API. 
```

> The main purpose of the CMIP7 DReq API is to extract the requested variables (along with their attributes) according to filters the user activates (a set of CMIP7 Experiments, and/or Opportunities, and/or Frequencies, etc.). It can either generates the resulting list in various formats (xls, csv, json) or return them as python objets that make the API *plugable* in Modelling Centres' data production workflows. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main purpose of the CMIP7 DReq API is to extract the requested variables (along with their attributes) according to filters the user activates (a set of CMIP7 Experiments, and/or Opportunities, and/or Frequencies, etc.). It can generate the resulting lists in different formats (csv, json) or return them as python objects that make the API *plugable* in Modelling Centres' data production workflows. 
```
(xlsx was mentioned too, but for spreadsheets I think we only provide csv output?)

<img width=750px src=./docs/static/3boxes_schema.png>

**Target audience:**  

> - *Modellers* configuring the climate models running CMIP7 simulations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Modellers* configuring the output variables for climate models running CMIP7 simulations
```

- *Software engineers* preparing CMIP7 modelling workflows

> - *Data providers* preparing CMIP7 output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Data providers* preparing CMIP7 netCDF output files for publication on [ESGF](https://esgf.github.io/)
```

**General features:** exploring the CMIP7 DR content - apply various filters - get the results in different formats.

## Release Versions

The latest **official release** of the CMIP7 Data Request is `v1.2.2.2` (30 September 2025).

> [Learn more about this release on the CMIP website](https://wcrp-cmip.org/cmip7-data-request-v1-2-2/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The latest **official release** of the CMIP7 Data Request Content is [described here](https://wcrp-cmip.org/cmip7-data-request-latest).
It can be viewed online [in Airtable](https://bit.ly/CMIP7-DReq-latest), or using a github-based [web viewer](https://cmip-data-request.github.io/cmip7-dreq-webview/latest), or using the DReq API as described below.
```

(using the links that point to the latest versions so we no longer have to remember to update the README when there's a new Content release 😄 )

:warning: **Note:** *The CMIP7 DReq Software versions are not aligned with the CMIP7 Data Request ones. So please, do not infer that v1.2.2 of the CMIP7 DReq Software "works with" or "reflects"  v1.2.2 of the CMIP7 Data Request, it is not the case!*

## Try It Without Installation

You can launch and interact with this repository  via [Binder](https://mybinder.org/) or [Google Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/). To do so, just click on one of the badges to run it in your browser:

[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software/main?filepath=notebooks)
[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software/)
<br>

> :bulb: This enables you, *without installing anything*, to play with the [notebooks](#notebooks), in a live environment that is your own playground.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:bulb: This enables you, *without installing anything on your local system*, to play with the [notebooks](#notebooks), in a live environment that is your own playground.
(Note, in Google Colab it may be necessary to add `! pip install CMIP7-data-request-api` to the beginning of the notebooks, while Binder should take care of that for you.)
```

## Installation

### Install in User mode

> Here is decribed the install of the *CMIP7 DReq Software* python package via `pip` for a simple user-mode usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is described how to install the *CMIP7 DReq Software* python package via `pip` for use as a python module in scripts/software or to use the command-line utilities. (To modify/develop the software, see below for [developer installation instructions](#install-in-developer-mode).)
```

```bash
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software/refs/heads/main/env.yml
conda env create -n my_dreq_env --file env.yml
```
At this stage, `my_dreq_env` conda environment contains all expected dependencies and to install the *"CMIP7 DReq Software"* package simply do:
```bash
conda activate my_dreq_env
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
python -m pip install CMIP7-data-request-api
```
:white_check_mark: If installation is ***successful*** you should be able to run the command:
```bash
export_dreq_lists_json --all_opportunities v1.2.2 amip.json --experiments amip
```
:x: If something went wrong, the package can be ***uninstalled*** using:
```bash
python -m pip uninstall CMIP7_data_request_api
```
:bell:To ***update*** a previousely installed version of the package:
```bash
python -m pip install --upgrade CMIP7_data_request_api
```
:bulb: And finally, if you want to run the [notebooks](#notebooks) in your enviromement (venv or conda), do not forget to install an ipykernel:
```bash

> python -m ipykernel install --user --name my_dreq_kernel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install jupyter
pip install ipykernel
python -m ipykernel install --user --name my_dreq_kernel
```

```
where `my_dreq_kernel` is the name of the kernel you want to appear in your `jupyter-notebook` interface.

> ### Install in Developpement mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install in Developer mode
```

> To install the *CMIP7 DReq Software*  for development purpose, first clone the source repository:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install the *CMIP7 DReq Software*  for development purposes, first clone the source repository:
```

```bash
git clone git@github.com:CMIP-Data-Request/CMIP7_DReq_Software.git
cd CMIP7_DReq_Software
```
Once an environment is created with the required dependencies (as in [user-mode install](#install-in-user-mode) above), this environement activated, go at the root-level directory of the repository and run: 
```bash
python -m pip install -e .
```

## Configuration

The package comes with a *default configuration*. After installation, you can ***initialize the configuration*** file with the default settings by running:
```bash
CMIP7_data_request_api_config init
```
This will create the `.CMIP7_data_request_api_config` file in your home directory.
Optionally, the default location of this file can be changed by setting the  `CMIP7_DR_API_CONFIGFILE` environment variable.

> :bulb:**Note:** *This initialization of the configuration step is optionnal, because in any case, the file will be automatically created the first time you use the software.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:bulb:**Note:** *Initializing the configuration file is optional, because the file will be automatically created the first time you use the software.*
```

The ***configuration file*** is a YAML file containing `key: value` pairs that
control the behavior of the software. 
You can modify the values by either editing the file directly or using the following command:
```bash
CMIP7_data_request_api_config <key> <value>
```
To reset the configuration to its default values, run:
```bash
CMIP7_data_request_api_config reset
```
For example, to set the software to run ***offline*** (i.e. without internet connection):
```bash
CMIP7_data_request_api_config offline true
```
This will prevent checks for updates and retrievals of new versions of the data request content.

## Quick Start

### Command-Line Utilities

A set of CLI utilities are available on pip install:

> 1. [`CMIP7_data_request_api_config`](data_request_api/data_request_api/command_line/config.py) to interact with config file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [`CMIP7_data_request_api_config`](data_request_api/data_request_api/command_line/config.py) to interact with config file, as [described above](#configuration)
```

2. [`export_dreq_lists_json.py`](data_request_api/data_request_api/command_line/export_dreq_lists_json.py) to get lists of requested variables
3. [`get_variables_metadata.py`](data_request_api/data_request_api/command_line/get_variables_metadata.py) to access variable names & definitions
4. [`compare_variables.py`](data_request_api/data_request_api/command_line/compare_variables.py) to track changes in variable definitions and attributes
5. [`estimate_dreq_volume.py`](data_request_api/data_request_api/command_line/estimate_dreq_volume.py) which is a configurable data volume estimator

**1. CMIP7_data_request_api_config**

> This is for configuring of the CLI. It has already been presented in [Configuration](#configuration) section, but  user may find here some additional details like the complete list of config parameters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is for configuring of the CLI, which has already been presented in the [configuration section](#configuration). Here we provide some additional details like the complete list of config parameters. 
```

> First time it is called, it genarates a default configuration file on your HOME directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First time it is called, it generates a default configuration file in your HOME directory.
```

  reset: Reset the config file to default values.
  <key> <value>: Update a specific key in the config file.
  help: print this help message.
```
</details>
<br>

<details>
<summary>Click here to show all the configuration parameters.</summary>

* `cache_dir` is the repository where the config file is stored
* `check_api_version` ('true' or 'false') checks if a newer version is available with pypi and raises a warning in case the installed version is not the latest one
* `consolidate` ('true' or 'false') to apply the consolidation on the _raw json-export_ of the DR * content (air tables) 
* `export` ('raw' or 'release') to use the _raw_ or _release json-export_ of the DR content (air tables) 
* `log_file` ('default' or prefered file path) to customize (or not) the log file
* `log_level` ('debug' or 'info') to set the verbosity level in CLI log files
* `offline` ('true' or 'false') set to 'true' to prevent checks for updates and retrievals of new versions of the data request content
* `variable_name` ('CMIP7 Compound Name' or 'CMIP6 Compound Name'), the  label used to uniquely identify the variables 

</details>
<br>

**2. export_dreq_lists_json**

> A json file is generated, listing the variables requested by the CMIP7 DR for the selected criteria. The list of variables is sorted per experiment (if several requested) and per priority (Core, High, Medium and Low). Variables a identified with their _CMIP7 compound names_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A json file is generated, listing the variables requested by the CMIP7 DR for the selected criteria. The list of variables is sorted per experiment (if several requested) and per priority (Core, High, Medium and Low). Variables are identified by default with their _CMIP7 compound names_.

:bulb: By changing the configuration parameter `variable_name`, variables in the output file can instead be identified by their _CMIP6 compound names_, or any other unique identifier present in the variables' metadata (e.g., `uid`).
```

positional arguments:
  {v1.2.2.2,v1.2.2.1,v1.2.2,v1.2.1,v1.2,v1.1,v1.0,v1.0beta,v1.0alpha,dev}
                        data request version
  output_file           file to write JSON output to

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -a, --all_opportunities
                        respond to all opportunities
  -f, --opportunities_file OPPORTUNITIES_FILE
                        path to JSON file listing opportunities to respond to. If it doesn't exist, a template will be created
  -i, --opportunity_ids OPPORTUNITY_IDS
                        opportunity ids (integers) of opportunities to respond to, example: -i 69,22,37
  -e, --experiments EXPERIMENTS
                        limit output to the specified experiments (case sensitive), example: -e historical,piControl
  -p, --priority_cutoff {core,high,medium,low}
                        discard variables that are requested at lower priority than this cutoff priority
  -m, --variables_metadata VARIABLES_METADATA
                        output file containing metadata of requested variables, can be ".json" or ".csv" file
(cmip7_dreq_venv-user) (base) 
```
</details>
<br>

**3. get_variables_metadata**

> A json file is generated, containing the variables  present in the CMIP7 DR (all or only the ones matching filter options, see below). Each single entry of the json file is the _CMIP7 compound name_ of the variable and all of the attributes associated with this varaible are given as (key,value) pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A json file is generated, containing the metadata of variables present in the CMIP7 DR (by default all of them, or alternately only the ones matching optional filter arguments). Each single entry of the json file is the _CMIP7 compound name_ of the variable and all of the attributes associated with this varaible are given as (key,value) pairs.

:bulb: By changing the configuration parameter `variable_name`, variables in the output file can instead be identified by their _CMIP6 compound names_.
```

        },
```
</details>
<br>

<details>
<summary>Click here to show all the available options.</summary>

```
$--> get_variables_metadata -h

usage: get_variables_metadata [-h] [-cn COMPOUND_NAMES] [-t CMOR_TABLES] [-v CMOR_VARIABLES]
                              {v1.2.2.2,v1.2.2.1,v1.2.2,v1.2.1,v1.2,v1.1,v1.0,v1.0beta,v1.0alpha,dev} outfile

Get metadata of CMOR variables (e.g., cell_methods, dimensions, ...) and write it to a json file.

positional arguments:
  {v1.2.2.2,v1.2.2.1,v1.2.2,v1.2.1,v1.2,v1.1,v1.0,v1.0beta,v1.0alpha,dev}
                        data request version
  outfile               output file containing metadata of requested variables, can be ".json" or ".csv" file

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -cn, --compound_names COMPOUND_NAMES
                        include only variables with the specified compound names, example: -cn Amon.tas,Omon.sos
  -t, --cmor_tables CMOR_TABLES
                        include only the specified CMOR tables, example: -t Amon,Omon
  -v, --cmor_variables CMOR_VARIABLES
                        include only the specified CMOR variable short names, example: -v tas,siconc
```
</details>
<br>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:bulb: The [CMIP7 CMOR tables](https://github.com/WCRP-CMIP/cmip7-cmor-tables) have been generated from the variables metadata in the DR. `get_variables_metadata` provides another way to view the variables metadata in the DR.

```

**4. compare_variables**

> Usefull for viewing the changes in variable metadata between two CMIP7 DR versions or between CMIP7 and CMIP6. If comparing to CMIP6, the CMIP6 CMOR tables will be loaded and a `cmip6.json` file created with the expected format to enable the comparison. There are 3 output files: one listing the missing variables and two files listing the differences (one sorted per variable, the other sorted per attribute). As above, variables a identified with their _CMIP7 compound names_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Useful for viewing the changes in variable metadata between two CMIP7 DR versions or between CMIP7 and CMIP6. If comparing to CMIP6, the CMIP6 CMOR tables will be loaded and a `cmip6.json` file created with the expected format to enable the comparison. There are 3 output files: one listing the missing variables and two files listing the differences (one sorted per variable, the other sorted per attribute). As above, variables are identified with their _CMIP7 compound names_.
```

<br>

Call example:
<br>
`compare_variables all_variables_metadata_v1.2.2.2.json cmip6`
<details>
<summary>Click here to see the CLI log.</summary>

```
Wrote cmip6.json
Loaded all_variables_metadata_v1.2.2.2.json
Loaded cmip6.json
Total number of variables with differences: 0
Wrote missing_variables.json
Wrote diffs_by_variable.json
Wrote diffs_by_attribute.json
```
</details>
<br>

<details>
<summary>Click here to see all the available options.</summary>

```
$--> compare_variables -h

usage: compare_variables [-h] [-c CONFIG_ATTRIBUTES] compare compare

Compare variables metadata between data request versions

positional arguments:
  compare               versions of variables to compare: json file or cmor tables

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -c, --config_attributes CONFIG_ATTRIBUTES
                        yaml file specifying metadata attributes to compare (will be created if it doesn't exist)
```
</details>
<br>

**5. estimate_dreq_volume**

> Provides an estimate of the data volumes. It takes as input a yaml file where the model-grid size parameters are to be set. Please note that theses these estimates are provisionnal and must be used with caution. It the output file is a json file where data volumes are given per experiment and grouped by variable priority (Core, High, Medim, Low).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provides an estimate of the data volumes. It takes as input a yaml file where the model-grid size parameters are to be set. Please note that theses these estimates are provisional and must be used with caution. The output file is a json file where data volumes are given per experiment and grouped by variable priority (Core, High, Medium, Low).
```
